Network Security
© 2002-2024 Robert M. Cannistra
All Rights Reserved.
1
Lab 01 – Building a Virtual Network Security Test Lab
A lab environment, otherwise known as a sand box, is crucial when working with vulnerable, exploitable,
and malicious software. Although a physical environment could be used as a lab environment, a more
typical environment is now built using virtualization software known as a hypervisor. This helps protect
the campus, corporate or home network from the potentially unsafe lab environment. This also helps
establish a portable lab environment where you are able to test advanced functionality from the ease of
your own desktop, or laptop.
For this particular lab, there is nothing particularly unsafe about it, so there’s no need to worry about
completely isolating this environment as we will have to do later this semester when dealing with
malware.
We will need to be able to create several VMs (known as virtual machines) as the semester progresses.
Some of these VMs will use guest Operating Systems (OSs) such as Windows or Linux variants whereas
others will be prebuilt VMs. In order to ensure you have the proper Windows software at your disposal,
you should have an account available for you to access Microsoft Azure for Education portal. This will
allow you to gain access to a licensed copy of the Windows Operating Systems you will need access to in
order to complete this lab and future ones.
Complete the following steps:
TASK ONE: Hypervisor Configuration
1. Install your Hypervisor of choice: VMware Workstation, VMware Fusion, or Oracle Virtualbox. If
you have a full VMware ESXi, Hyper-V, or KVM implementation at your disposal, you may use
that as well; however, please keep in mind that some of the software we will use this semester
may not be ready for primetime and may contain bugs that should NOT be implemented within
a production environment.
TASK TWO: Windows Lab Environment Configuration
1. The goal of this task is to create a VM of a Windows Domain Controller using either Windows
Server 2022, 2019, 2016, or 2012 R2. You will also create a VM of a Windows client. The
Windows client version is up to you: Windows 11, 10, 8.1, or 7. Please know that Windows
Server is unable to run on ARM right now. This means that if you have a newer macbook with
an M1, M2, or M3 processor, you will be unable to run an x86 or x64 operating system. You will
need to use another computer to complete this lab. If you do not have another computer to
complete this step of the lab and are not able to use a computer lab on campus, please let me
know.
2. A lab walkthrough using older Windows versions can be found at
http://thehackerplaybook.com/Windows_Domain.htm Complete the tasks displayed in this
walk-through.
Network Security
© 2002-2024 Robert M. Cannistra
All Rights Reserved.
2
TASK THREE: Kali Linux Download
1. We will be utilizing other VMs throughout this course. From an offensive perspective, you
should download a Kali Linux .iso, or virtual appliance from: https://www.kali.org. This will be
used as your attack VM at a later date in this course. Create a Kali Linux VM and show that you
are able to login to this VM. There is nothing else that needs to be completed with Kali for this
initial lab.
DELIVERABLE:
1. Complete a professional write-up and include the following information:
a. Description: Brief description, such as an executive summary, depicting an overall view
of what topic or technology you are concentrating on within this lab. Keep this short
and to the point. Think like a consultant and be mindful that what you are providing
should represent you as a professional in the industry.
b. Topology: Use Microsoft Visio, or Lucid Chart, to create an aesthetically pleasing
network topology. This should include devices, network connections, virtual NIC labels,
IP Addresses, subnet masks, domain information, credential used, and anything else you
feel would be beneficial to add.
c. Key Syntax: Sometimes it’s nice to include key syntax used. For instance, if you’re not a
Linux guru, it might be nice to include how you configured a static IP Address in the
Linux CLI, or what files you needed to modify in order to configure a primary DNS server
IP Address or domain suffix.
d. Verification: Provide key screenshots that display verification that the lab was
completed. For instance, if the lab required you to login from a windows client to a
domain controller, show the screenshot or multiple screenshots verifying this action was
achieved successfully. Make sure you provide a description of what the screenshot is
showing. Do not simply add the screenshot and state, “here is the screenshot”. These
descriptions and screenshots should paint a story of the work you put into this lab and
verify you have successfully completed the virtual environment configuration. Be
thorough and professional!
e. Conclusion: Wrap up your lab report with a short conclusion. If something did not
work, state it. If everything did work successfully, state that as well.
f. References: Make sure you include any works cited here as well as throughout your lab
report. If you looked something up, include it.
2. Upload the following file(s) to the assignment within Brightspace:
a. your .docx or .pdf file (please do NOT zip your files)
Good Luck with your first lab!